LIFE PROCESSES
rhe uncovered part of leaf (on both sides of the aluminium foil) which was exposed to sunlight turns
blue-black on adding iodine solution showing that starch is present in this part of leaf [see Figure
17(d)]. This means that the part of leaf which was exposed to sunlight could do photosynthesis to
make starch.
Since the part of leaf which was covered and hidden from sunlight does not contain starch but the
part of leaf which was exposed to sunlight contains starch, therefore, we conclude that sunlight is
necessary for photosynthesis (to make food like starch).
From the above experiment, we actually get two conclusions. That :
(i) sunlight is necessary for the process of photosynthesis, and
(ii) leaves make starch as food by photosynthesis.
Most of the common plants have leaves which are totally green (because
all the parts of such leaves contain the green pigment called chlorophyll).
But there are some plants whose leaves are partly green and partly white.
The green part of such a leaf contains chlorophyll but the white part of such
a leaf does not contain chlorophyll. The leaves which are partly green and
partly white are called ‘variegated leaves’. The plants such as croton and
Coleus have variegated leaves which are partly green and partly white. We
will use a plant having variegated leaves in the next experiment to show
that chlorophyll is necessary for the process of photosynthesis in plants. Figure 18. Variegated leaves.
2. Experiment to Show that Chlorophyll is Necessary for Photosynthesis
We take a potted plant like croton whose leaves are partly green and partly white [see Figure 19(a)].
The green part of the leaf has chlorophyll but the white part of the leaf does not have chlorophyll.
2. Place this plant in a completely dark place for about three days to destarch its leaves.
Take out the potted plant from the dark place and keep it in bright sunshine for three to four days.
Dropper — . lodine solution Decolourised
Green part of leaf (Starch present) iz Turns blue-black No blue-black colour (No starch present) (c) Iodine solution being noured on decolourised
White part of leaf
(No chlorophyll)
(a) Partly green and
partly white leaf. (b) Chlorophyll removed leaf (after boiling
in alcoho!).
Figure 19. Experiment to show that chlorophyll is necessary for photosynthesis.
4. Pluck the variegated leaf from the plant, boil it in water for a few minutes and then remove its green
colour ‘chlorophyll’ by boiling it in alcohol. The green parts of the leaf get decolourised. So, we get
decolourised jeaf [see Figure 19(b)]-
Wash the decolourised leaf with hot water to soften it and remove any chlorophyll which may be
sticking to it.
6 Pour iodine solution over the colourless leaf and observe the change in colour of the leaf.
We will find that the outer part of leaf that was originally white (without chlorophyll) does not turn
blue-black on adding iodine solution showing that no starch is present in this outer part of the leaf
[see Figure 19(c)]. From this observation we conclude that the photosynthesis to make starch does not
take place without chlorophyll.