SCIENCE FOR TENTH CLASS ,; BIOLOGY
8. Inaddition to carbon dioxide and water, state two other conditions. for the process of Photosynthesis
9. Apart from sunlight and chlorophyll, what other things are required t) make food by photosynthesis ?
to take place.
10. (a) Name a gas used in photosynthesis. The leaves of a plant first prepare food A by photosynthesis. Food A then gets converted jnto food B. What)
(b) Name a gas produced in photosynthesis.
12, Which substance is used to remove chlorophyll from a green leaf during photosynthesis experiments ?
are A and B ?
Why do we boil the leaf in alcohol when we are testing it for starch ?
14, (a) Name the pigment in jeayes which absorbs sunlight nergy:
(6) What is the colour of this pigment ?
Name the pigment which can absorb solar energy:
17. Apart from carbon dioxide and water, name four other raw materials which are needed by the plants. Name the organelle Of plant cells in which photosynthesis occurs.
18. Where is chlorophyll mainly present in 2 plang 7 19. What is the name of those cells in the leaf of a plant which control the opening and closing of stomata?
21. All the animals can be divided into three
groups on the basis of their eating habits. Name the three groups, Name an animal whose process of obtaining food is called phagocytosis.
22. What is the scientific name of the animals which Te :
()) only meat eaters ?
(ii) only plant eaters ?
(iii) both, plant and meat eaters ?
23. Name the green pigment present in the leaves of a plant.
Arrange the following processes involved in the nutrition in animals in the correct order (in which they take
place) :
Assimilation, Egestion, Ingestion, Absorption, Digestion
How does Amoeba engulf the food particle ?
What substances enter into the food vacuole in Amoeba to break down the food ?
27. From which part of the body, undigested food is egested in Amoeba ?
28. Name a unicellular animal which uses cilia to move food particles into its mouth.
29. Name the enzyme present in human saliva. What type of food material is digested by this enzyme ?
30. Which of the organs perform the following functions in humans ?
(i) Absorption of food
(if) Absorption of water
What moves the food in the digestive organs ?
What is the other name of food pipe ?
What substance is mixed with food in the mouth during chewing by the teeth ?
What is the name of tiny projections on the inner surface of small intestine which help in absorbing thé
digested food ?
35. In which part of the digestive system is water absorbed ?
What is the name of the opening in the human body through which undigested food is thrown out ?
Where is digested food absorbed into blood in human body ?
38. Name the biological catalysts which bring about chemical digestion of food.
39. Fill in the following blanks with suitable words -
(a) All green plants are......
(b) All non-green plants and animals are...
(c) Heterotrophs depend O-- ANG ONEL...crseereennrer fOr FOO.
(d) Green plants use...... ANG. ....eeeeeetd Make food.
(e) Iodine turns blue-black on reacting With...