SCIENCE FOR TENTH CLASS : BIOLOGY
The inner part of leaf which was originally green (contained chlorophyll) turns blue-black on adding, }
iodine solution showing that starch is present in this inner part of the leaf [see Figure 19(c)]- From this)
observation we conclude that the photosynthesis to make starch takes place in the Presence of
chlorophyll. In other words, chlorophyll is | ary for the process of photosynthesis to take plagg
3. Experiment to Show that Carbon Dioxide is Necessary for Photosynthesis.
We take a potted plant having long and narrow leaves and place it in a completely dark place for
Take a glass bottle having a wide mouth and put some potassium hydroxide solution (KOH solution) about three davs to destarch its leaves.
in it. (This potassium hydroxide solution is to absorb the carbon dioxide gas from the air present in)
the glass bottle so that no carbon dioxide is left in the air inside the glass bottle).
Take a rubber cork which fits tightly into the mouth of the glass bottle and cut it into two halves.
Put a destarched leaf of in-between the two halves of the cut cork and then fit the cork in the mouth of the glass bottle. The the potted plant (while it still attached plant),
upper half of the leaf should remain outside the glass bottle and only the lower half of the leaf should
be inside the glass bottle [as shown in Figure 20(a)].
The potted plant (with its one destarched leaf half inside the glass bottle containing potassium
hydroxide solution) is kept in sunlight for 3 to 4 days. During this period, the upper half of the leaf
(which is outside the glass bottle) gets carbon dioxide from the air but the lower half of the leaf
(which is inside the glass bottle) does not get any carbon dioxide. This is because all the carbon
dioxide of the air present in the glass bottle has been absorbed by potassium hydroxide solution. And
no fresh air can come into the closed glass bottle.
Carbon dioxide

lodine solution
Decolourised Turns blue-black
No carbon
deontich
hydroxide solution
(to absorb
7 SArbon dioxide)
(a) The upper part of leaf
the leaf has "0 carbon it but the lower half of has carbon dioxide around
dioxide available to it.
(No starch present) (c) lodine solution decolourised leaf. being poured on (b) Chlorophyll removed in alcohol). leaf (after boiling
Figure 20. Experiment to show that carbon dioxide is necessary for photosynthesis.
6. Pluck the leaf from the plant and take it out from the glass bottle.
chlorophyll from the leaf by boiling it in alcohol. In this way, we get a decolourised leaf Remove the green coloured
20(b)].
Wash the decolourised leaf with water to remove any chlorophyll which may be sticking to it. [see Figure
Pour iodine solution over the colourless leaf and observe the change in colour of the leaf.
We will find that the lower half part of the leaf (which was inside the glass bottle having no carbon
dioxide around it), does not turn blue-black on adding iodine solution showing, that no starch is
present in this lower half of the leaf [see Figure 20(c)]. From this observation we conclude that the
photosynthesis to make starch in the leaf does not take place without carbon dioxide.